# Homework 4: Testing Hypotheses, Confidence Intervals

Deadline:

This assignment is due on February 10 (Friday), 2023 at 23:59

Directly sharing answers is not okay, but discussing problems with the course staff or with other students is encouraged. Refer to the policies page to learn more about how to learn cooperatively.

You should start early so that you have time to get help if you're stuck. 


```python
# Don't change this cell; just run it. 

import numpy as np
from datascience import *

# These lines do some fancy plotting magic.",
import matplotlib
%matplotlib inline
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.style.use('fivethirtyeight')
import warnings
warnings.simplefilter('ignore', FutureWarning)
```

## 1. Spam Calls


## Part 1: 781 Fun

Yanay gets a lot of spam calls. An area code is defined to be a three digit number from 200-999 inclusive. In reality, many of these area codes are not in use, but for this question we'll simplify things and assume they all are. **Throughout these questions, you should assume that Yanay's area code is 781.**

Yanay suspects that there's a higher chance that the spammers are using his area code (781) to trick him into thinking it's someone from his area calling him. Ashley thinks that this is not the case, and that spammers are just choosing area codes of the spam calls at random from all possible area codes (*Remember, for this question we’re assuming the possible area codes are 200-999, inclusive*). Yanay wants to test his claim using the 50 spam calls he received in the past month.

Here's a dataset of the area codes of the 50 spam calls he received in the past month.


```python
# Just run this cell
spam = Table().read_table('spam.csv')
spam
```

Our **null hypothesis** is that area codes for Yanay’s spam calls are chosen at random, and each area code (200-999) is equally likely to be chosen. Our **alternative hypothesis** is that there's a higher chance of getting a spam call with an area code of 781.

<div class="hide">\pagebreak</div>

**Suppose you decide to use the number of times you see the area code 781 in 50 spam calls as your test statistic.**

**Question 1.** 
Write a function called `simulate` that generates exactly one simulated value of your test statistic under the null hypothesis.  It should take no arguments and simulate 50 area codes under the assumption that the result of each area is sampled from the range 200-999 inclusive with equal probability. Your function should return the number of times you saw the 781 area code in those 50 random spam calls.


<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_1
manual: false
-->


```python
possible_area_codes = ...
def simulate():
    ...
    
# Call your function to make sure it works
simulate()
```

**Question 2.** Generate 20,000 simulated values of the number of times you see the area code 781 in 50 random spam calls. Assign `test_statistics_under_null` to an array that stores the result of each of these trials. 

*Hint*: Use the function you defined in Question 1.

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_2
manual: false
-->


```python
test_statistics_under_null = ...
repetitions = ...

...
    
test_statistics_under_null
```

**Question 3.** Using the results from Question 2, generate a histogram of the empirical distribution of the number of times you saw the area code 781 in your simulation. **NOTE: Use the provided bins when making the histogram.**

*Hint:* Remember we can only generate histograms from a particular data type.


<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_3
manual: true
-->
<!-- EXPORT TO PDF -->


```python
bins = np.arange(0,5,1) # Use these provided bins
...
```

<div class="hide">\pagebreak</div>

**Question 4.** Compute an empirical P-value for this test.

*Hint*: For a refresher on computing P-value, check out this [textbook section](https://www.inferentialthinking.com/chapters/11/3/Decisions_and_Uncertainty.html#Conventional-Cut-offs-and-the-P-value).

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_4
manual: false
-->


```python
# First calculate the observed value of the test statistic from the `spam` table.
observed_val = ...
p_value = ...
p_value
```

**Question 5.** Suppose you use a P-value cutoff of 1%. What do you conclude from the hypothesis test? Why?

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_5
manual: true
-->
<!-- EXPORT TO PDF -->

*Write your answer here, replacing this text.*

## Part 2: Multiple Spammers

Instead of checking if the area code is equal to his own, Yanay decides to check if the area code matches the area code of one of the 8 places he's been to recently, and wants to test if it's more likely to receive a spam call with an area code from any of those 8 places. These are the area codes of the places he's been to recently: 781, 617, 509, 510, 212, 858, 339, 626.

**Question 6.** Define the null hypothesis and alternative hypothesis for this investigation.

*Reminder: Don’t forget that your null hypothesis should fully describe a probability model that we can use for simulation later.*


<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_6
manual: true
-->
<!-- EXPORT TO PDF -->

*Write your answer here, replacing this text.*

<div class="hide">\pagebreak</div>

**Suppose you decide to use the number of times you see any of the area codes of the places Yanay has been to in 50 spam calls as your test statistic.**

**Question 7.** 
Write a function called `simulate_visited_area_codes` that generates exactly one simulated value of your test statistic under the null hypothesis.  It should take no arguments and simulate 50 area codes under the assumption that the result of each area is sampled from the range 200-999 inclusive with equal probability. Your function should return the number of times you saw any of the area codes of the places Yanay has been to in those 50 spam calls.

*Hint*: You may find the textbook [section](https://www.inferentialthinking.com/chapters/11/1/Assessing_Models#Predicting-the-Statistic-Under-the-Model) on the `sample_proportions` function to be useful. For `model_proportions`, under the null hypothesis, what's the chance of drawing one of the area codes Yanay has recently been to? What's the chance you don't draw one of those?

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_7
manual: false
-->


```python
model_proportions = ...
def simulate_visited_area_codes():
    ...
    
# Call your function to make sure it works
simulate_visited_area_codes()
```

**Question 8.** Generate 20,000 simulated values of the number of times you see any of the area codes of the places Yanay has been to in 50 random spam calls. Assign `visited_test_statistics_under_null` to an array that stores the result of each of these trials. 

*Hint*: Use the function you defined in Question 7.

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_8
manual: false
-->


```python
visited_test_statistics_under_null = ...

repetitions = ...
...
visited_test_statistics_under_null
```

**Question 9.** Using the results from Question 8, generate a histogram of the empirical distribution of the number of times you saw any of the area codes of the places Yanay has been to in your simulation. **NOTE: Use the provided bins when making the histogram.**

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_9
manual: true
-->
<!-- EXPORT TO PDF -->


```python
bins_visited = np.arange(0,6,1) # Use these provided bins
...
```

**Question 10.** Suppose you run this test for 4000 different people after observing each person's last 50 spam calls. When you reject the null hypothesis for a person, you accuse the spam callers of favoring the area codes that person has visited. If the spam callers were not actually favoring area codes that people have visited, can we compute how many times we will incorrectly accuse the spam callers of favoring area codes that people have visited? If so, what is the number? Explain your answer. Assume a 0.05% P-value cutoff.

Hint: If you are stuck, be sure to read over [Section 11.4](https://www.inferentialthinking.com/chapters/11/4/Error_Probabilities.html) in the textbook.

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_10
manual: true
-->
<!-- EXPORT TO PDF -->

*Write your answer here, replacing this text.*

## 2. Thai Restaurants


Ben and Frank are trying see what the best Thai restaurant is. They survey 1500 students selected uniformly at random, and ask each student what Thai restaurant is the best (*Note: this data is fabricated for the purposes of this homework*). The choices of Thai restaurant are Lucky House, Imm Thai, Thai Temple, and Thai Basil. After compiling the results, Ben and Frank release the following percentages from their sample:

|Thai Restaurant  | Percentage|
|:------------:|:------------:|
|Lucky House | 8% |
|Imm Thai | 53% |
|Thai Temple | 25% |
|Thai Basil | 14% |

These percentages represent a uniform random sample of the population of all customers. We will attempt to estimate the corresponding *parameters*, or the percentage of the votes that each restaurant will receive from the entire population. We will use confidence intervals to compute a range of values that reflects the uncertainty of our estimates.

The table `votes` contains the results of the survey.


```python
# Just run this cell
votes = Table.read_table('votes.csv')
votes
```

**Question 1.** Complete the function `one_resampled_percentage` below. It should return Imm Thai's **percentage** of votes after simulating one bootstrap sample of `tbl`. Reminder that a percentage is between 0 and 100.

**Note:** `tbl` will always be in the same format as `votes`.

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_1
manual: false
-->


```python
def one_resampled_percentage(tbl):
    ...

one_resampled_percentage(votes)
```

**Question 2.** Complete the `percentages_in_resamples` function such that it simulates and returns an array of 2020 bootstrapped estimates of the percentage of voters who will vote for Imm Thai. You should use the `one_resampled_percentage` function you wrote above. 

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_2
manual: false
-->


```python
def percentages_in_resamples():
    percentage_imm = make_array()
    ...
```

In the following cell, we run the function you just defined, `percentages_in_resamples`, and create a histogram of the calculated statistic for the 2,020 bootstrap estimates of the percentage of voters who voted for Imm Thai. Based on what the original Thai restaurant percentages were, does the graph seem reasonable? Talk to a friend or ask a TA if you are unsure!

*Note: This might take a few seconds to run.*


```python
resampled_percentages = percentages_in_resamples()
Table().with_column('Estimated Percentage', resampled_percentages).hist("Estimated Percentage")
```

**Question 3.** Using the array `resampled_percentages`, find the values at the two edges of the middle 95% of the bootstrapped percentage estimates. (Compute the lower and upper ends of the interval, named `imm_lower_bound` and `imm_upper_bound`, respectively.)

*Hint:* If you are stuck on this question, try looking over chapter 13 of the textbook.

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_3
manual: false
-->


```python
imm_lower_bound = ...
imm_upper_bound = ...
print("Bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for the percentage of Imm Thai voters in the population: [{:f}, {:f}]".format(imm_lower_bound, imm_upper_bound))
```

**Question 4.** The survey results seem to indicate that Imm Thai is beating all the other Thai restaurants combined among voters. We would like to use confidence intervals to determine a range of likely values for Imm Thai's true lead over all the other restaurants combined. The calculation for Imm Thai's lead over Lucky House, Thai Temple, and Thai Basil combined is:

$$\text{Imm Thai's % of the vote} - \text{(Lucky House's % of the vote + Thai Temple's % of the vote + Thai Basil's % of the vote)}$$

Define the function `one_resampled_difference` that returns **exactly one value** of Imm Thai's percentage lead over Lucky House, Thai Temple, and Thai Basil combined from one bootstrap sample of `tbl`.

*Note: Given a table of votes, how can you figure out what percentage of the votes are for a certain restaurant?* **Be sure to use percentages, not proportions, for this question!**

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_4
manual: false
-->


```python
def one_resampled_difference(tbl):
    bootstrap = ...
    imm_percentage = ...
    lh_percentage = ...
    tt_percentage = ...
    tb_percentage = ...
    ...
```

**Question 5.**
Write a function called `leads_in_resamples` that finds 2,020 bootstrapped estimates (the result of calling `one_resampled_difference`) of Imm Thai's lead over Lucky House, Thai Temple, and Thai Basil combined. Plot a histogram of the resulting samples. 

**Note:** Imm Thai's lead can be negative.

Hint: If you see an error involving “NoneType”, consider what components a function needs to have. 

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_5
manual: true
-->
<!-- EXPORT TO PDF -->


```python
def leads_in_resamples():
    ...

sampled_leads = leads_in_resamples()
Table().with_column('Estimated Lead', sampled_leads).hist("Estimated Lead")
```

**Question 6.** Use the simulated data from Question 5 to compute an approximate 95% confidence interval for Imm Thai's true lead over Lucky House, Thai Temple, and Thai Basil combined.

<!--
BEGIN QUESTION
name: q1_6
manual: false
-->


```python
diff_lower_bound = ...
diff_upper_bound = ...
print("Bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for Imm Thai's true lead over Lucky House, Thai Temple, and Thai Basil combined: [{:f}, {:f}]".format(diff_lower_bound, diff_upper_bound))
```

## 3. Submission


To submit your assignment, please download your notebook as a .ipynb file and submit to Canvas. You can do so by navigating to the toolbar at the top of this page, clicking File > Download as... > Notebook (.ipynb) or HTML (.html). Then, upload your files under "Assignment 4" on Canvas.


```python

```
